now if you've ever purchased a car
chances are you took it for a spin first
typically this is done with the
salesperson in the passenger seat
tempting you with optional features and
making sure you don't decide to skip
town without paying but what happens if
you take one of those turns a bit too
sharp or someone cut you off at just the
wrong time who's on the hook if you
total your car before it's officially
yours oops
as with many legal questions that's
easier to ask than answer car
dealerships like most businesses insure
their inventory against damage or theft
dealerships spend thousands of dollars a
year on insurance policies with a price
tag for larger businesses reaching into
the millions often these policies come
from either the manufacturer or the
company they use to finance their
inventory this coverage is usually
applied to the lot as a whole rather
than each car individually they also
tend to be reasonably broad encompassing
all manners of loss or damages these
policies would usually cover any
accidents that occurred during a
test-drive
even if that isn't necessarily what they
were intended to protect against
although you might be still required to
cover the dealerships insurance
deductible so case closed right the
insurer covers the cost of repairs and
you go on your merry way well not always
remember when I said this was
complicated if you've ever had to file
an insurance claim or just listen really
carefully to those Allstate commercials
you know that determining who's at fault
is a big part of the process usually
playing the blame game is
counterproductive but when it comes to
insurance someone is going to have to
pay for everything it's only fair that
the person or group responsible for the
accident is the one responsible for
paying for it
if the dealerships insurance company
feels that you were responsible for the
accident they obviously aren't going to
want to be the ones footing the bill if
you were speeding ran a red light or
stop sign or were reckless or negligent
in some other way the insurance provider
might refuse to cover the damages
this sort of thing is rare but if it
happens the dealership is going to have
two options they can either swallow the
loss or go after the person responsible
for damaging their property I'll let you
decide which outcome seems more likely
mmm-hmm getting your personal insurance
company to pay out often means suing you
for the damages and that's where things
can get messy messy in the metaphorical
sense anyways I imagine things got
literally messy when you scattered bits
of car across four lanes of highway but
that usually goes without saying drivers
who were speeding or texting behind the
wheel will find it hard to avoid the
blame although there are mitigating
circumstances that might change who's
held responsible for example let's say
that you are driving along really trying
to get a feel for the car when your
phone beeps you look down to see who's
calling and don't notice the vehicle in
front of you slowing to a stop
you of course slam on the brakes but
it's too late to keep the front of a car
that isn't yours yet from merging with
the back of someone else's in this case
the fault would be considered 100% yours
and your own insurance company would be
liable for all the damages you wouldn't
be paying very much out of pocket but
don't think your provider isn't gonna
start jacking up those rates now let's
go back a bit
cue the dated rewind effect now instead
of you distracting yourself what if it's
the dealer's fault
a test drive gives them an excellent
opportunity to expand on their sales
pitch they can really get into all the
reasons you absolutely need that new
Ford Focus and hey while they've got you
have you heard about their new deluxe
package for only twenty thousand dollars
more hi that's basically free they're
really getting into it maybe a little
too much in fact as their animated
gestures caused you to take your eyes
off the road and precisely the wrong
time while you are technically the one
driving it could be argued that the
salesperson bears much more
responsibility than you do for causing
the accident
in that case they'd be at fault right
well maybe the dealership probably
required you to sign a form or two
before letting you get behind the wheel
among these would have been a waiver
freeing them from liability in the event
of an accident the exact terms will vary
depending on the laws of whatever state
the accident occurred but it's pretty
hard to avoid the blame after signing
that kind of document and don't go
thinking you can dodge the issue by
deliberately making your signature
impossible to read if you put pen to
paper it's your responsibility it would
ultimately come down to what exactly
they did to distract you and it can be
hard to say on whose lap the blame would
eventually land all of this is assuming
lawyers would need to get involved at
all which is far from certain in some
jurisdictions this is because the
drivers insurance is always responsible
for covering the damages no matter what
even if that isn't the case the
dealership may encourage you to use your
own insurance instead of theirs this is
especially true if the test driver was
unsupervised but be careful before you
say yes not every insurance policy
covers driving a car that doesn't belong
to you so it's always a good idea to
check with your provider before making
any promises another option that the
dealer may pressure you to take is
simply buying the car you crashed
whether or not this is a good idea will
depend on how severe the accident was if
all you managed to do was scratch the
paint or ding the bumper you might be
better off just taking the car and
getting it over with on the other hand
the lender may try pressuring you into
buying a car with much more severe
damage a minor fender bender is one
thing but if you're going to end up
spending thousands of dollars on repairs
buying a damaged car might not be in
your best interests in a worst-case
scenario an unscrupulous dealer may try
to convince you that you are required to
purchase a vehicle you damaged but that
isn't the case that's what they have
insurance for unless they don't have
insurance which in case you might not
want to get into their car
all driving an uninsured car is always
dangerous and if they are cutting that
big of a corner just imagine what else
they've skipped on now I'm not saying
it'll definitely break down the moment
you're off the lot but you know you're
in for an unpleasant surprise sooner or
later the good news is that accidents
during test drives are incredibly rare
and tend to be quite minor this may have
something to do with dealerships being
fairly cautious about who they'll allow
to test drive their cars yes test
driving seems like an integral part of
the car buying process up there with
making a down payment but dealerships
aren't required to give you one the most
common reasons for refusal are that
their perspective buyer either didn't
have a license or had one that was
expired they're also pretty iffy about
letting drivers loose with high-end rare
or high-performance cars these tend to
be prime targets for thieves and
joyriders so it makes sense that some
dealerships are cautious about who they
let behind the wheel
speaking of which are there any cars you
would really like to take for a spin why
don't you let me know down in the
comments I know I've got my eye on a
yellow Ferrari well some dealerships are
very protective about their cars others
are more than happy to let customers
keep the car overnight before buying
them but this practice is rare insurance
companies don't like it for the obvious
reason that it's an added risk on their
end it also further muddies the water in
terms of liability and if there's one
universal truth about humanity it's that
no one likes extra paperwork oh and
taking out the garbage the important
thing is to be careful whenever you're
behind the wheel especially if the car
you're driving isn't yours